What is Java?
Java is a programming language and a platform. Java is a high level, robust, object-oriented and 
secure programming language.
Java was developed by Sun Microsystems (which is now the subsidiary of Oracle) in the year 1995. 
James Gosling is known as the father of Java.
Platform: Any hardware or software environment in which a program runs is known as a platform. 
Since Java has a runtime environment (JRE) and API, it is called a platform.

Application
1. Desktop Applications such as acrobat reader, media player, antivirus, etc.
2. Web Applications such as irctc.co.in, javatpoint.com, etc.
3. Enterprise Applications such as banking applications.
4. Mobile
5. Embedded System
6. Smart Card
7. Robotics
8. Games, etc.

Features of Java
Simple
Java is very easy to learn, and its syntax is simple, clean and easy to understand. 
According to Sun Microsystem, Java language is a simple programming language because:
1.Java syntax is based on C++ (so easier for programmers to learn it after C++).
2.Java has removed many complicated and rarely-used features, for example, explicit pointers, operator overloading, etc.
3.There is no need to remove unreferenced objects because there is an Automatic Garbage Collection in Java.

Object-oriented
Java is an object-oriented programming language. 
Everything in Java is an object. Object-oriented means we organize our software as a combination of 
different types of objects that incorporate both data and behaviour.

Java is platform independent because it is different from other languages like 
C, C++, etc. which are compiled into platform specific machines while
Java is a write once, run anywhere language. 
A platform is the hardware or software environment in which a program runs.

Secured
Java is best known for its security. With Java, we can develop virus-free systems. Java is secured because:
No explicit pointer
Java Programs run inside a virtual machine sandbox

Robust
The English mining of Robust is strong. Java is robust because:
It uses strong memory management.
There is a lack of pointers that avoids security problems.
Java provides automatic garbage collection which runs on the Java Virtual Machine to get rid of objects 
which are not being used by a Java application anymore.

Architecture-natural
Java is architecture natural because there are no implementation dependent features, 
for example, the size of primitive types is fixed.

Portable
Java is portable because it facilitates you to carry the Java bytecode to any platform. 
It doesn't require any implementation.

High-performance
Java is faster than other traditional interpreted programming languages because Java bytecode is "close" to native code.

Java is a widely used, object-oriented programming language designed to be portable, 
secure, and robust. If you're starting out or reviewing, here are the core Java concepts explained clearly:

1. Object-Oriented Programming (OOP)
Java is built around OOP principles:
Class & Object
Class = blueprint (e.g., Car)
Object = instance of a class (e.g., a specific car)

Encapsulation 
Wrapping data (variables) and methods into a single unit
Achieved using access modifiers (private, public, etc.)

Inheritance
One class inherits properties of another
Promotes code reuse

Polymorphism
One method behaves differently based on context
Types: method overloading & overriding

Abstraction
Hiding implementation details


Java Comments
Java comments are text notes written in the code to provide an explanation about the source code
The comments can be used to explain the logic or for documentation purposes
The compiler does not compile the comments. In Java, comments are very similar to C and C++.
In Java, there are three types of comments:
Single-line comments
Multiline comments
Documentation comments

1. Single Line Comment
The single-line comment is used to add a comment on only one line and can be written by using the 
two forward slashes (//). 
These comments are the most used commenting way.
The single line comments are the most used commenting way to explain the purpose (or to add a text note) of the line.

Syntax:
// comment

2. Multiline Comment
The multiline (or, multiple-line) comments start with a forward slash followed by 
an asterisk (/*) and end with an asterisk followed by a forward slash (*/) and 
they are used to add comment on multiple lines.

The multiline comments are very useful when we want to put a long comment spreading across 
multiple lines or to comment out the complete code.

Syntax:
/*
Comment (line 1)
Comment (line 2)
...
*/

3. Documentation Comment
The documentation comments are used for writing the documentation of the source code
The documentation comments start with a forward slash followed by the two asterisks (/**), 
end with an asterisk followed by a backward slash (*/), and all lines between the start and end must start with an asterisk (*).

The documentation comments are understood by the Javadoc tool and can be used to create HTML-based documentation.

Syntax:
/**
* line 1
* line 2
...
*/

What is a Java Variable?
A variable provides us with named storage that our programs can manipulate.
Each variable in Java has a specific type, which determines the size and layout of the variable's memory;
the range of values that can be stored within that memory; and the set of operations that can be applied to the variable.

Variable Declaration and Initialization
You must declare all variables before they can be used. 
Java variables are declared by specifying the data type followed by the variable name.
To assign a value, use the assignment (=) operator followed by the value. 
Each declaration or initialization statement must end with a semicolon (;).

Syntax:
data type variable [ = value][, variable [ = value] ...] ;

Here data type is one of Java's data types and variable is the name of the variable
To declare more than one variable of the specified type, you can use a comma-separated list.

Example of Valid Variables Declarations and Initializations:
Following are valid examples of variable declaration and initialization in Java −
int a, b, c;         // Declares three ints, a, b, and c.
int a = 10, b = 10;  // Example of initialization
byte B = 22;         // initializes a byte type variable B.
double pi = 3.14159; // declares and assigns a value of PI.
char a = 'a';        // the char variable a iis initialized with value 'a'

Java Variables Types
The following are the three types of Java variables:
Local variables
Instance variables
Class/Static variables

1. Java Local Variables
Local variables are declared in methods, constructors, or blocks.
Local variables are created when the method, constructor or block is entered and the variable 
will be destroyed once it exits the method, constructor, or block.
Access modifiers cannot be used for local variables.
Local variables are visible only within the declared method, constructor, or block.
Local variables are implemented at stack level internally.
There is no default value for local variables, 
so local variables should be declared and an initial value should be assigned before the first use.